The Works Progress Administration and the Federal Arts Project
In his April 7, 1932 speech, Roosevelt said, "It is my thought that with the exception of certain of the normal public building operations of the government, all emergency public works shall be united in a single new and greatly enlarged plan." The overriding criterion of the new program, said the president, was that "all work undertaken should be useful-not just for a day, or a year, but useful in the sense that it affords permanent improvement in living conditions or that it creates future new wealth for the nation."
In 1935, President Roosevelt was ready to launch a three-to-five-year program that would spend as much as six billion dollars on projects that included building housing and highways and carrying electricity deeper into rural areas.
The Emergency Relief Appropriations Act
In April, 1935, Congress passed the Emergency Relief Appropriations Act authorizing $4.8 billion to be spent on work relief. Roosevelt called the effort that was about to start "the most comprehensive work plan in the history of the nation." On May 6, Roosevelt signed the executive order creating the Works Progress Administration (WPA). WPA labor would be used for building roads, public buildings, water and sewer lines, and a variety of other projects. 
Project proposals were submitted to the WPA for approval. For example, projects approved by the WPA for Oakland, California, included rat control, book repairs at public libraries, park and playground improvements, painting and repairs to schools and other public buildings. Applications for projects like these had come from virtually every local government around the country. These projects had the virtue of being labor-intensive and quick to start, and they did improve the infrastructure in small ways, as well as improve people's lives.
Roosevelt named Harry Hopkins head of the WPA. Hopkins stated that the new work program "would give the nation's resources in wages to the unemployed, in return for which they would help build and improve America." 
Federal One: The WPA's Federal Arts Project 
During a speech in Iowa City, Hopkins announced that the government would sponsor a national theater and other arts projects under the WPA. Before long it had painters, sculptors, musicians and composers, actors and stagehands, and playwrights and writers all around the country applauding their good fortune.
The WPA's Federal One had freed the arts from their need to please commercial tastes and elite patrons. With the government funding artists, actors, playwrights, and musicians, their work had spilled into parks, schools, churches, and community centers. Millions of Americans, many for the first time in their lives, thronged to concerts and plays and studied paintings and drawings, much of the time without having to take a penny from their pockets. They were sending their children to free art and music classes and attending these classes on their own. After a year and a half, the WPA's mission to take the arts to the people and keep arts workers out of breadlines was by most measures a complete success. 

Federal One had by now spent approximately $40 million and employed a total of some 40,000 workers. Both figures were minuscule portions of the WPA's total funding and jobs,' but the arts projects had already received an outsized share of attention and publicity—and notoriety. Some critics, among them the New York Times, objected on principle to the idea of paying artists to create art rather than build roads. "Their usefulness has been widely doubted," the newspaper wrote in a September 1, 1936 editorial. 
Artists had had high expectations when the projects started. Douglas Lynch, in Portland, Oregon, had been eking out a living painting scenic backdrops for department store window displays. When he heard the news it was as if "we artists had received a commission from the Medicis."5 Printmaker and lithographer Will Barnet viewed Federal One as overdue recognition by the government that the arts deserved public support. "It was one of the greatest efforts in history to make a democracy a democracy," he said years later. Artists took it as a natural evolutionary stage in the nation's development; it was finally following the lead of European countries in providing the arts with public subsidies. 


