THE GREAT DEPRESSION A NATION IN CRISIS 
In the United States, the 1920s were a time of great prosperity. That prosperity ended in a stock market crash in October, 1929. As the nation slid into a catastrophic depression, factories closed, employment and incomes tumbled, and millions lost their homes, hopes, and dignity.
 
Crash!
During the two years preceding the stock market crash, the market had hit record highs, stimulated by optimism, easy credit, and speculators' manipulations. After peaking in September, 1929, the market suffered several sharp checks, and on October 29, "Black Tuesday," panicked investors dumped their stocks, wiping out the previous year's gains in one day. Confidence in the economy disappeared, and the slide continued for months, and then years. The market hit bottom in July 1932. By then, the stock of U.S. Steel had plunged from S262 to $22, for example. Much of the paper wealth of America had evaporated, and the nation sank into the Great Depression. 

The Wall Street crash marked the beginning of the depression, but it did not cause it. The depression stemmed from weaknesses in the New Era2 economy. Most damaging was the unequal distribution of wealth and income. Workers' wages and farmers' incomes had fallen far behind industrial productivity and corporate profits; by 1929, the richest 0.1 percent of American families had as much total income as the bottom 42 percent. With more than half the 
nation's people living at or below the subsistence level,3 there was not enough purchasing power to maintain the economy. 

A second factor was that oligopolies4 dominated American industries. By 1929, the 200 largest corporations (out of 400,000) controlled half the corporate wealth. Their power led to prices kept artificially high and rigid rather than determined by supply and demand. Because it did not respond to purchasing power, this system not only helped bring on economic collapse but also dimmed prospects for recovery. 

The Depression Spreads 

By early 1930, the effects of financial contraction were painfully evident. Factories shut down or cut back, and industrial production plummeted; by 1932, it was scarcely 50 percent of its 1929 level. Steel mills operated at 12 percent of capacity, auto factories at 20 percent. Unemployment skyrocketed, as an average of 100,000 workers a week were fired in the first three years after the crash. By 1932, one-fourth of the labor force was out of work and the wages of those Americans lucky enough to work fell sharply. Personal income dropped by more than half between 1929 and 1932. Moreover, the depression began to feed on itself in a vicious circle: shrinking wages and employment cut into purchasing power, causing businesses to slash production again and lay off workers, thereby further reducing purchasing power. 

The depression particularly battered farmers. Commodity prices fell by 55 percent between 1929 and 1932, s 1 ling farm income. Cotton farmers earned only 31 percent of the pittance they had received in 1929. Unable to pay their mortgages, many farm families lost their homes and fields. The dispossessed roamed the byways, highways, and railways of a troubled country.

Urban families were also evicted when they could not pay their rent. Some moved in with relatives; others lived in Hoovervilles —the name reflects the bitterness directed at the president'—shacks where people shivered, suffered, and starved. Oklahoma City's vast Hooverville covered 100 square miles. 

Soup kitchens became standard features of the urban landscape, with lines of the hungry stretching for blocks. But charities and local communities could not meet the massive needs, and neither the states nor the federal government had welfare or unemployment compensation programs. To survive, people planted gardens in vacant lots and back alleys and tore apart empty houses or tapped gas lines for fuel. 

President Hoover's Response 

The president took unprecedented steps to resolve the crisis but shrank back from the interventionist policies activists urged. Hoover fought economic depression more vigorously than any previous president, but he believed that voluntary private relief was preferable to federal intervention. As the depression worsened, Hoover adopted more activist policies. He persuaded Congress to cut taxes to boost consumers' buying power, and he increased the public works budget. In January 1932, he established the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), which lent federal funds to banks, insurance companies, and railroads so that their recovery could "trickle down" to ordinary Americans. Hoover still opposed direct aid to the general public, although he finally allowed the RFC to lend small amounts to state and local governments for unemployment relief. But these programs satisfied few Americans. 

Roosevelt Becomes President 

During his 1932 presidential election campaign against Herbert Hoover, Franklin D. Roosevelt said, "These unhappy times call for the building of plans that rest upon the forgotten, the unorganized but the indispensable units of economic power; for plans that build from the bottom up and not from the top down, that put their faith once more in the forgotten man at the bottom of the economic pyramid." "The forgotten man" was a memorable phrase. It had a powerful impact. In November, he was elected in a major victory over Hoover. 

On March 4, 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt took office and immediately reassured the American people. Roosevelt created a number of work programs, such as the CCC (Civilian Conservation Corps) and the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). However, far more jobs were needed for the 15 million unemployed. 
