An Artist's Perspective on the Federal Arts Project
Richmond, Virginia, didn't feel the Depression to any great extent. It's a tobacco town.1 A strange thing, I don't care how deep a Depression might be, people seem to insist on smoking. That sort of sustained the city, I'm certain.
I got out of art school in 1930. That was the proper time for any artist to get out of school. (Laughs.) Everybody was unemployed, and the artist didn't seem strange any more. I got a job teaching at a girls' school in Philadelphia, Beaver College. This was 1932. I taught two days a week and spent the rest of the time painting. The WPA was founded2 then, '33, '34.
The total cost of the Federal Arts Project was only $23 million. Many of these paintings, sculptures, and prints were given to museums, courthouses, public buildings. I think that today those in museums alone are worth about $100 million. Not only did this $23 million support young artists just out of school, but artists in transition. I'll wager if there were five hundred gallery artists who made it, who are represented by dealers, about four hundred were on WPA.
Nobody was buying art in those days. The Whitney Museum had $35,000 a year to buy contemporary art in the Thirties. We thought that was just the greatest thing ever. Now a man will pay $35,000 for a single painting.
Guys on the project made something in the neighborhood of $94 a month. Then a guy might have a sweetheart1 on the project, so that would be almost $200 a month. You could live very well. But the most important thing was: the artist had a patron who made no aesthetic judgments. So artists for the first time, I dare say, had a patron—the Government-who made no aesthetic judgments at all.
The director of the Federal Arts Project was Edward Bruce. He was a friend of the Roosevelts-from a polite family- who was a painter. He was a man of real broad vision. He insisted there be no restrictions. You were a painter: Do your work. You were a sculptor: Do your work. You were a printmaker: Do your work. An artist could do anything he pleased.
I painted this thing called "Tobacco." If I'm going to paint tobacco, let me do some work on tobacco. It was 1936. I spent a summer on this tobacco farm in North Carolina. I picked tobacco because I wanted to know the whole story. An instant observer could do all this surface quality. To be involved, it has to have a deeper meaning, right? We're all total fellows, aren't we? Right. I insist on being a total fellow. I couldn't sit there and make a sort of representational and calling it priming tobacco (i.e., pulling the leaves off the tobacco plant), if I hadn't done it myself. I had to.
I lost my job at Beaver College. I wouldn't expect a man in 1930 to think like a man in 1968, would you? Of course not. But there are many people who will take a point of view as artists: I'll be an idealist. I'll be a romanticist, I'll be this or that or the other. You've got to be what you are, churning up the day in which you live and pull out of that experience something that is representative in artistic terms.
Artists have to live, right? Eat, sleep, breathe, build. The great difference is when you have a government as a patron or anyone else as a patron, who made no demands on you at all, there were no enlarged notions of making that extra buck.
During the Depression, we were all more or less engulfed. Today when people say poverty, they turn their head. They don't want to admit poverty exists. They're living too high, so on-the-fat, right? If you're living on-the-fat and see poverty, you simply say: They're no good. In the Depression, there was a little more acceptance of the unemployed guy, because you could be he.
